PEP 694: Abstract file upload mechanisms (#4431)
python/peps: peps/pep-0694.rst

Reviewer: Okay, I've pretty much run out of gas.  I think some of my comments may not make a ton of sense since I reviewed it sequentially rather than reading the whole thing and then composing my feedback.  Apologies for that.

Overall, I think this is a really good simplification, and I really like the direction it's going in.  I know I have a lot of musings, feedback, thoughts, comments, and suggestions sprinkled throughout, and I hope they're moderately helpful.

If it would be helpful, I can try to edit the PR locally and push changes, or I could branch your PR and push a new branch/PR, or we can just try to make it all work here.  Happy to also chat about it separately!

``filename`` (**required**)
    The name of the file being uploaded.

``size`` (**required**)
    The size in bytes of the file being uploaded.

``hashes`` (**required**)
    A mapping of hash names to hex-encoded digests.  Each of these digests are the checksums of the
    file being uploaded when hashed by the algorithm identified in the name.

    By default, any hash algorithm available in `hashlib
    <https://docs.python.org/3/library/hashlib.html>`_ can be used as a key for the hashes
    dictionary [#fn-hash]_. At least one secure algorithm from ``hashlib.algorithms_guaranteed``
    **MUST** always be included. This PEP specifically recommends ``sha256``.

    Multiple hashes may be passed at a time, but all hashes provided **MUST** be valid for the file.

``mechanism`` (**required**)
    The file-upload mechanisms the client intends to use for this file.
    This mechanism **SHOULD** be chosen from the list of mechanisms advertised in the
    :ref:`Publishing Session response body <publishing-session-response>`.
    A client **MAY** send a mechanism that is not advertised in cases where server operators have

>     documented a new or up-coming mechanism that is available for use on a "pre-release" basis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    documented a new or upcoming mechanism that is available for use on a "pre-release" basis.
```

``metadata`` (**optional**)
    If given, this is a string value containing the file's `core metadata
    <https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/core-metadata/>`_.

Servers **MAY** use the data provided in this request to do some sanity checking prior to allowing
the file to be uploaded.  These checks may include, but are not limited to:

- checking if the ``filename`` already exists in a published release;

- checking if the ``size`` would exceed any project or file quota;

- checking if the contents of the ``metadata``, if provided, are valid.

If the server determines that upload should proceed, it will return a ``202 Accepted`` response,
with the response body below.
The :ref:`status <session-status>` of the session will also include
the filename in the ``files`` mapping.
If the server determines the upload cannot proceed,
it **MUST** return a ``409 Conflict``.
The server **MAY** allow parallel uploads of files, but is not required to.
If the server cannot proceed with an upload because
the ``mechanism`` supplied by the client is not supported

> it **MUST** return a ``422 Unprocessable Entity``.

Reviewer: I suggest mentioning the `422` first, followed by the `409`:

> If the server cannot proceed with an upload because the ``mechanism`` supplied by the client is not supported, it **MUST** return a ``422 Unprocessable Entity``.  If the server determines the upload cannot proceed for any other reason, it **MUST** return a ``409 Conflict``.  The server **MAY** allow parallel uploads of files, but is not required to.

Author: 1ff2415c

.. _file-upload-session-response:

Response Body
+++++++++++++

The successful response includes the following:

.. code-block:: json

    {
      "meta": {
        "api-version": "2.0"
      },
      "links": {
        "publishing-session": "...",
        "file-upload-session": "..."
      },
      "status": "pending",
      "valid-for": 3600,
      "mechanism": {
        "identifier": "http-post-bytes",
        "file_url": "...",
        "attestations_url": "..."
      }
    }

Besides the ``meta`` key, which has the same format as the request JSON, the success response has
the following keys:

``links``
    A dictionary mapping :ref:`keys to URLs <file-upload-session-links>` related to this session,
    the details of which are provided below.

``mechanism``
    A mapping containing the necessary details for the supported mechanism
    as negotiated by the client and server.
    This mapping **MUST** contain a key ``identifier`` which maps to

>     the identifier string for the File Upload Mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    the identifier string for the chosen File Upload Mechanism.
```

I also suggest making "File Upload Mechanism" an internal cross-reference.

      "action": "complete",
    }

If the server is able to immediately complete the File Upload Session, it may do so and return a
``201 Created`` response and set the status of the File Upload Session to ``complete``.
If it is unable to immediately complete the File Upload Session
(for instance, if it needs to do validation that may take longer than reasonable in a single HTTP
request), then it may return a ``202 Accepted`` response
and set the status of the File Upload Session to ``processing``.

In either case, the server should include a ``Location`` header pointing back to the File Upload
Session status URL, and if the server returned a ``202 Accepted``, the client may poll that URL to
watch for the status to change.

If an error occurs, the appropriate ``4xx`` code should be returned, as described in the
:ref:`session-errors` section.

.. _file-upload-session-cancelation:

Cancellation and Deletion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A client can cancel an in-progress File Upload Session, or delete a file that has been
completely uploaded.  In both cases, the client performs this by issuing a ``DELETE`` request to
the File Upload Session URL of the file they want to delete.

> A successful deletion request **MUST** response with a ``204 No Content``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A successful deletion request **MUST** respond with a ``204 No Content``.
```

or :ref:`File Upload Session creation response body <file-upload-session-response>`,
that they got when they initially created the Publishing Session or File Upload Session,
except with any changes to ``status``, ``valid-for``, or ``files`` reflected.

If the server refuses to extend the session for the requested number of seconds, it still returns a
success response, and the ``valid-for`` key will simply include the number of seconds remaining in
the current session.

.. _staged-preview:

Stage Previews
--------------

The ability to preview staged releases before they are published is an important feature of this
PEP, enabling an additional level of last-mile testing before the release is available to the
public.  Indexes **MAY** provide this functionality through the URL provided in the ``stage``
sub-key of the :ref:`links key <publishing-session-links>` returned when
the Publishing Session is created.
The ``stage`` URL can be passed to installers such as ``pip`` by setting the `--extra-index-url
<https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/cli/pip_install/#cmdoption-extra-index-url>`__ flag to this value.
Multiple stages can even be previewed by repeating this flag with multiple values.

> In either case, the index will return views that expose the staged releases to the installer tool,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If supported, the index will return views that expose the staged releases to the installer tool,
```

making them available to download and install into virtual environments built for that last-mile

> testing.  The former option allows for existing installers to preview staged releases with no

Reviewer: ```suggestion
testing.  This option allows existing installers to preview staged releases with no
```

> changes, although perhaps in a less user-friendly way.  The latter option can be a better user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
changes to the installer tool required.
```

> experience, but the details of this are left to installer tool maintainers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The details of this user experience are left to installer tool maintainers.
```

.. _file-upload-mechanisms:

File Upload Mechanisms
----------------------

Servers **MUST** implement :ref:`required file upload mechanisms <required-file-upload-mechanisms>`.
Such mechanisms serve as a fallback if no server specific implementations exist.

Each major version of the Upload API **MUST** specify at least one required File Upload Mechanism.

New required mechanisms **MUST NOT** be added
and existing required mechanisms **MUST NOT** be removed

> without an update to the :ref:`major version <versioning>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
without an update to the :ref:`major version <versioning>`.  Any server-specific or experimental mechanisms added or removed **MUST NOT** change the major version number of this specification.
```

Reviewer: Should we also limit the minor version number?  E.g. what if `myindex.example.org` adds a `"wishful-thinking"` mechanism?  Should that index be allowed to call their version number `"2.1"`?

Author: This is specifically about required mechanisms. Those should only be changed on major version and via PEP.

Author: ```suggestion
without an update to the :ref:`major version <versioning>`.  Any server-specific or experimental mechanisms added or removed **MUST NOT** change the major or minor version number of this specification.
```

.. _required-file-upload-mechanisms:

Required File Upload Mechanisms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``http-post-bytes``

> +++++++++++++++++++

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+++++++++++++++++++

Upload API version 2.0 compliant servers **MUST** support the ``http-post-bytes`` mechanism.
```

The ``implementation identifier`` **SHOULD** concisely describe the underlying implementation
and contain only alphanumeric characters ``[a-z0-9]`` and ``-``.

For example:

====================================== ================  =========================================================================
File Upload Mechanism string           Server Operator   Mechanism description
====================================== ================  =========================================================================
``vnd-pypi-s3multipart-presigned``     PyPI              S3 multipart upload via pre-signed URL
``vnd-pypi-http-fetch``                PyPI              File delivered by instructing server to fetch from a URL via HTTP request
``vnd-acmecorp-http-fetch``            Acme Corp         File delivered by instructing server to fetch from a URL via HTTP request
``vnd-acmecorp-postal``                Acme Corp         File delivered via postal mail
``vnd-madscience-quantumentanglement`` Mad Science Labs  Upload via quantum entanglement
====================================== ================  =========================================================================

> If a server intends to match the behavior of another server's implementation, it **MAY** respond

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a server intends to precisely match the behavior of another server's implementation, it **MAY** respond
```

    to a mapping containing details necessary to execute the mechanism.

.. _file-upload-session-links:

Session Links
+++++++++++++

For the ``links`` key in the success JSON, the following sub-keys are valid:

``session``
    The endpoint where actions for the parent session can be performed.

``file-upload-session``
    The endpoint where actions for this file-upload-session can be performed.
    including :ref:`canceling and discarding the file upload session <file-upload-session-cancelation>`,
    :ref:`querying the current file upload session status <session-status>`,
    and :ref:`requesting an extension of the file upload session lifetime <session-extension>`
    (*if* the server supports it).

.. _file-upload-session-completion:

File Upload Session Completion
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

To complete a file upload session, which indicates that the file upload mechanism has been executed
and did not produce an error, a client issues a ``POST`` to the ``file-upload-session`` link in the
file upload session creation response body.

The requests looks like:

.. code-block:: text

>     Content-Type: application/vnd.pypi.upload.v2+json

Reviewer: As above.

    {
      "meta": {
        "api-version": "2.0"
      },
      "action": "complete",
    }

> After receiving this requests the server **MAY** perform additional asynchronous processing on the file,

Reviewer: If I'm on the right track with my thinking about the intent above, then I think if we keep this "File Upload Session Completion" request, the server MUST respond with either a `200` or `202` in the success case (and of course appropriate error codes if a failure occurs).  The server would respond with a `200` if the post-completion processing is done synchronously to the request.  It would respond with a `202` if that processing must be done asynchronously (e.g. it would take a long time to verify a checksum or such).  In the later case, there would have to be an endpoint that the client could poll to get the status of the post-processing.

One option there would be to just post the same request to the same endpoint but use `"action": "status"` because I *think* if we make the file upload endpoint mechanism specific, we can't put it here.

The ``message`` and ``source`` strings do not have any specific meaning, and are intended for human
interpretation to aid in diagnosing underlying issue.

File Upload Mechanisms
----------------------

> File Upload Mechanisms, with the exception of ``http-post-application-octet-stream`` are left as an

Author: I like all of that. It is _effectively_ the intent I have in my mind, with the exception of future required mechanisms.

I would feel comfortable tying the required mechanisms to major versions of the API, so our next chance to add new required mechanisms would be 3.0. Relaxing this to minor is acceptable to me, but since we're advertising "Since minor API version differences should never be disruptive, only the major version is included in the content type; the version number is prefixed with a v.", saying that a mechanism is now required to support a minor version seems incorrect.

implementation detail specific to each server. Servers **MUST** implement a
``http-post-application-octet-stream`` mechanism as a fallback if no server specific implementations

> exist.

Reviewer 2: As a client maintainer, can we require that all servers must implement `http-post-application-octet-stream`, so that it's possible to develop a client compatible with all servers?

Author: I would agree that it isn't perfectly clear. I said "MUST" and then dropped an "if" in, will clarify.

The ``message`` and ``source`` strings do not have any specific meaning, and are intended for human
interpretation to aid in diagnosing underlying issue.

File Upload Mechanisms
----------------------

> Servers **MUST** implement :ref:`required file upload mechansisms <required-file-upload-mechanisms>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Servers **MUST** implement :ref:`required file upload mechansisms <required-file-upload-mechanisms>`.
```
Servers **MUST** implement :ref:`required file upload mechanisms <required-file-upload-mechanisms>`.

Such mechanisms serve as a fallback if no server specific implementations exist.

Each major version of the Upload API **MUST** specify at least one required File Upload Mechanism.

New required mechanisms **MUST NOT** be added and existing required mechanisms **MUST NOT** be removed
without an update to the :ref:`major version <versioning>`.

A given server **MAY** implement an arbitrary number of server specific mechanisms
and is responsible for documenting their usage.

> Server specific implementations **MUST** be prefixed with ``vnd-``

Reviewer: Ah, now that I'm here (and admittedly, running out of gas -- it's EOW) I see that my earlier comment about the mechanism name of `pypi-atomic` wouldn't be appropriate because it would be a required protocol and not a vendor protocol.  So maybe that would be changed to `atomic` instead.

Since minor API version differences should never be disruptive, only the major version is included
in the content type; the version number is prefixed with a ``v``.

> The minor API version specified in the ``.meta.api-version`` JSON key of client requests

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The major API version specified in the ``.meta.api-version`` JSON key of client requests
```
